---
layout: post
category : haskell
title: Monoids, The Forgotten Friends
tags : [functional, haskell]
---

The Monoid typeclass is one of the simplest type clasees in Haskell's
Data package. Normally, it's compared to an accumulator or a log. Although
these comparisons could be helpfull for someone making his first contacts
with the language, I think its simplicity makes it ideal for a more
formal introduction. The difficulties a newbie will find with the
formalisms will be paid off handsomely when they studies other more complex
typeclasses and libraries.

Once you grasp the concept of monoids, you'll start to see them everywhere,
and what's more important, you'll learn how the famous Monoid, Functor, Foldable,
Traversable and Monad classes will help you to write more generic code.


## On Haskell and Mathematics

Before diving into the examples, let's take a moment to talk about monoids, not as a Haskell
typeclass, bus as a mathematical concept. In mathematics, a monoid is a triplet
`(type, value, function)` that satisfy certain rules, the monoid rules. A type alone is not a monoid.
Only the three element together, and only when they satisfy those rules, are a monoid.

In Haskell, concepts like monoids are approximated as type classes. A type class can declare
values and functions, but it can't declare rules. So, the monoid rules can't be enforced
in haskell. Also notice that a type can implement a type class only once, meanwhile, in math
a type can be in several monoids.


## Monoid Definition

In haskell, the monoid class is declared as:

{% highlight haskell linenos %}
class Monoid m where
  mempty :: m
  mappend :: m -> m -> m
  mconcat :: [m] -> m
{% endhighlight %}

Let's forget for one moment `mconcat`, who's not necessary for the minimal definition
of Monoid and already has a default implementation. This means that a type `m` can be
a monoid if it has one value, which we'll call `mempty` and a function that takes two
values of that type and returns a value of the exact same type. Additionaly, a monoid
must satisfy the following rules (which can't be expressed in the class definition):

{% highlight haskell linenos %}
mpemty `mappend` a = a
a `mappend` mpempty = a
{% endhighlight %}

This simply means that if one of the arguments of `mappend` is `mempty`, the result
is the other argument.


## Our First Monoid

Now that we know the definition of monoid, it'll be nice to see some examples.
To define a monoid we need a type, one value of that type and a function that satisfy
the above definition. Let's see if we can find a way to make monoids from a numeric type.
Haskell has more than a dozen of number types, all of which are part of the `Num` class.
Once we've chose our type (`Num`) we need a function that takes two numbers, and return
another number. We have a lot of functions to chose: addition, substraction, multiplacation,
division, potentation...

Let's try with addition. With our type (`Num`), and `mappend` (`+`) selected, we only need
`mempty`, a number that satisfy:

{% highlight haskell linenos %}
mempty + a = a
a + mempty = a
{% endhighlight %}

That number is of course zero. We've discovered that numbers, the addition and zero,
form a monoid. Using mathematical language, we'd say that `(Num, +, 0)` is a monoid.
So, we could make our `Num` an instance of `Monoid` using `+` as `mappend` and `0` as
`mempty`. But there are other monoids that have numbers as their types. For example,
`(Num, *, 1)` is also a monoid. And since both addition and multiplication are very important,
and we can only chose a triplet for our `Num` monoid, Haskell, wisely, chose none.

Notice also, that we can't make a monoid using `-` or `/`, we can't find any `mempty` that
satisfy the monoid rules for these functions.


## More Examples

Other examples of triplets that form a monoid are:

* `(Num, maxBound, <)`
* `(Num, minBound, >)`
* `(Boolean, False, ||)`
* `(Boolean, True, &&)`
* `(List, [], ++)`


The idea that Monoid captures is that there are certain data types on which it makes sense
to "summarize" (`mappend`) their values; data types who have a "null" (`mempty`) value.
If you have two sounds, you can create a new one by playing them sequentially, that's a
Monoid. Or you can play them simultaneously, that's another monoid. If you have two images, you
can get a new one by putting them side by side, or one above other. There is a `mempty`
sound (no sound) and a `mempty` image (a 0x0 pixels image).


## Monoid Importance

In my opinion, the real importance of Monoid and other fundamental type classes
(Functor, Traversable, Applicative, Foldable, Monad, ...), is that they define very generic
interfaces. As such, they can be applied in a broad range of situations, making
the code more general, and transmitting a clearer idea of the nature of the
algorithms.
